vulgo - commonly
Ibid. - in the same place
item - likewise
nonnulli codd. - several manuscripts
similiter - similarly
Vat. - Vatican manuscript
idem, - the same
Ibid. bis. - in the same place twice
praeterea vulgo - moreover in the common texts
ubi nunc - where now
Transl. - translate
et - and
cf. Popp. adn. - compare Poppo's note
vel - or
pro - for
ubi vulgo - where commonly
alii - others
olim - formerly
ex Hom. H. Ap. - from Homer's Hymn to Apollo
vid. - see
cum - with
item Ib. - likewise there
boni codd. - good manuscripts
ubi - where
Mosqu. - Moscow manuscript
multi codd. - many manuscripts
Ibid. ter. - in the same place a third time
ubi nonnulli codd. - where several manuscripts
depravati codd. - corrupted manuscripts
vulgo additur - commonly added
Absolute, - absolutely
om. nonnulli codd. - omit several manuscripts
de pestilentia - concerning the plague
plurimi codd. - very many manuscripts
vulgo pro - commonly instead of
praeterea - besides
Dor. - Doric dialect
bis. - twice
Bekk. - Bekker's edition
om. - omit
de Sicilia - concerning Sicily
Vat. et alii - Vatican and other manuscripts
Neutr. - neuter
p. - page
alii leg. - others read
ubi Vat. - where Vatican manuscript
de tempore, - concerning time
pauci codd. - few manuscripts
Schol. - Scholiast
de Alcibiade - concerning Alcibides
de navibus, - concerning ships
Ib. - there
interpretantur - they explain
aut - or
adv. - adverbially
Mosq. - Moscow manuscript
de Brasida - concerning Brasidas
ubi alii - where others
plerique codd. - very many manuscripts
Impers. - impersonal
Translate, - translate
Neutr. subst. - neuter substantive
Aor. - aorist
de hominibus, - concerning men
de rebus, - concerning matters
ex. Hom. H. Ap. - from Homer's Hymn to Apollo
de Pausania - concerning Pausanias
cum infin. - with infinitive
Adverbialiter, - adverbially
de Piraeo - concerning the Piraeus
Intrans. - intransitive
i. e. - that is
absolute, - absolutely
in elogio - in an inscription
deest - is lacking
de Themistocle - concerning Themistocles
leg. - read
impers. - impersonal
de navibus - concerning ships
in foedere Dorico - in the Doric treaty
de loco, - concerning a place
c. acc. - with accusative
Bekk. Goell. - Bekker Goeller edition
ubi nunc deletum. - where now deleted
cf. - compare
in multis codd. - in many manuscripts
Bas. - Basil edition
sub. - understand
cum particip. - with participle
cum dat. - with dative
Vat. H. - Vatican Homer
codd. - manuscripts
sine artic. - without the article
nisi potius - unless rather
de Pericle - concerning Pericles
malim - I would prefer
cum inf. - with infinitive
de Theseo - concerning Theseus
abest - is absent
absol. - absolutely
de Homero - concerning Homer
Reg. - Regius manuscript
cum accus. - with accusative
cum acc. et inf. - with accusative and infinitive
vid. sub - see under
de Messana - concerning Messene
praeterea vulgo pro - moreover commonly instead of
c. inf. - with infinitive
Ibid. bis, - in the same place twice
similia, - similar things
c. gen. - with genitive
Similiter - Similarly
c. - with
Ibid. quater. - in the same place four times
Oppon. - opposed
modo - just now
nisi ibi - unless there
Comp. - comparative
cf. Popp. adn. et suppl. - compare Poppo's note and supplement
vid. infra. - see below
D. - Dorice
simil. - similarly
qd vulgo deest - which commonly is lacking
eadem vi, - with the same force
in plerisque codd. - in most manuscripts
fortasse - perhaps
de Hippia tyranno - concerning the tyrant Hippias
est - there is
cum artic. - with the article
interpretantur; cf. Popp. adn. - they explain; compare Poppo's note
ut - as
cum negat. - with negative
de Tissapherne - concerning Tissaphernes
de Plataeensibus - concerning the Plataeans
similiter Ib. - similarly there
de Lacedaemoniis - concerning the Lacedaemonians
seu - or if
de Aetna - concerning Aetna
de mensura, - concerning measurement
cum genit. - with genitive
cum acc. - with accusative
signif. dub. cf. Popp. adn. - meaning doubtful, compare Poppo's note
cf. Popp. Prol. - compare Poppo's Preface
Absol. - absolutely
item Ibid. - likewise there
de morbo - concerning disease
Particip. absol. - absolute participle
vulgo et Bekk. - commonly and in Bekker's text
item, - likewise
de morbo, - concerning disease
Perf. - perfect
de Hermis - concerning the Hermae
oppon. - opposed
vulgo add. - commonly added
i. q. - the same as
vulgo deest - commonly lacking
Fut. - future
iidem - the same
Neutr. subst., - neuter substantive
gen. - genitive
plur. - plural
c. dat. - with dative
id. quod - the same as
vulgo omissa - commonly omitted
de rivulis ignitis, - concerning the fiery streams
s. - supply
in malis codd. - in poor manuscripts
Adjective, - adjectivally
sunt - they are
ubi Schol. - where the Scholiast
de Eurytanibus - concerning the Eurytanians
Gr. - Greek
mali codd. - poor manuscripts
Plur. - plural
Bekk. Anecd. - Bekker Anecdota
ubi exciderat - where it had dropped out
ubi ex Vat. accessit - where it was added from the Vatican manuscript
similiter. - similarly.
al. - elsewhere
H. - Homeric
om. Vat. - omit Vatican manuscript
de Plemmyrio - concerning Plemmyrion
de oratoribus - concerning orators
de Alcmaeone - concerning Alcmaeon
Pal. - Palatine manuscript
et similia, - and similar things
deletum - deleted
quae supposita recentioribus editoribus videntur esse; cf. Popp. adn. - which seem to have been interpolated by later editors; compare Poppo's note
de duobus, - concerning two
de Corinthiis - concerning the Corinthians
Ibid. Ibid. - in the same place in the same place
an - or
de Hiera insula - concerning the island Hiera
in nave - on the ship
in epexegesi, - in apposition
om. plurimi codd. - omit very many manuscripts
praeter ea, quae supra memorata sunt - besides those things which were mentioned above
perf. - perfect
de locis mediterraneis, - concerning inland places
cum gen. - with genitive
sq. - following
oppon. parti, - opposed to the participle
praeced. artic. ponitur de summa alicuius rei, aut de multitudine in unum collecta, - the preceding article is used of the sum of some matter, or of a multitude gathered into one
ubi multi codd. - where many manuscripts
cum partic. - with participle
in multis codd. additur - in many manuscripts is added
subaud. - understand
in epigrammate - in an epigram
ubi suspectum - where suspicious
ad hostes - to the enemy
ubi vulgo deest - where commonly lacking
de Corintho - concerning Corinth
de barbaris - concerning barbarians
ter. - third time
in ablat. - in the ablative
rarius - more rarely
similiter, - similarly
de iis, quae in rerum natura fiunt, - concerning those things which happen in the natural world
de pugna, - concerning a battle
item cum - likewise with
om. Reg. - omit Regius manuscript
et Ibid. - and in the same place
ubi subiectum omissum est - where the subject is omitted
ubi subiectum abest - where the subject is lacking
de propugnaculo ligneo - concerning the wooden defense work
seq. - following
artic. vulgo deest - the article commonly lacking
Sing. - singular
cf. Popp. Pr. - compare Poppo's Prolegomena
in insulam - to the island
intrans. - intransitive
de populis aliorum imperio subditis, - concerning peoples subject to others' rule
cum duplici acc. - with double accusative
ingenii, - of character
vulgo ante - commonly before
cf. Popp. Prol. p. - compare Poppo's Prolegomena page
duo codd. - two manuscripts
et simil. - and similar things
om. multi et boni codd. - omit many and good manuscripts
multi et boni codd. - many and good manuscripts
de Echinadibus insulis - concerning the Echinades Islands
confusum, - confused
interpr. - translate
de servis, - concerning slaves
Vat. Bekk. Goell. - Vatican Bekker Goeller edition
vulgo et Goell. - commonly and in Goeller's edition
imperio - under rule
c. infin. - with infinitive
ubi Vat. et alii - where Vatican and other manuscripts
de Graecia - concerning Greece
de Nicia - concerning Nicias
Cod. Bas. - Codex Basileensis
ex Hom. H. in Ap. - from the Homeric Hymn to Apollo
de Cylone - concerning Cylon
de Sphacteria - concerning Sphacteria
de terra - concerning land
cum praepos. - with preposition
deteriores codd. - inferior manuscripts
adverbialiter, - adverbially
activo sensu, - in active sense
de bello, - concerning war
de exsulibus, - concerning exiles
Neutr. substantive, - neuter substantive
colonos - colonists
de legibus, - concerning laws
nonnulli codd. et Bekk. - several manuscripts and Bekker's text
simil., - similarly
c. particip. - with participle
item. - likewise.
Conf. - compare
de Heraclea - concerning Heraclea
Ib - there
Imperson. - impersonally
ubi adde - where add
active, - actively
Subst. - substantive
vulgo et in libris deest - commonly and in texts is lacking
de Amphipoli - concerning Amphipolis
de clandestinis consiliis, - concerning secret plans
de Hippia - concerning Hippias
vid. s. - see below
comp. - compare
sup. - above
in his vocibus - in these words
Honorifice, - honorifically
al. codd. - other manuscripts
Minervae - of Minerva
Dubium - doubtful
Val. - Valerius
Sed deleta - but deleted
Praeterea - besides
Partic. subst. posit. - participle used substantively
i.e. - that is
cf. infra - compare below
ergo dubia et haec significatio. - therefore this meaning also is doubtful.
Vat., vulgo - Vatican, commonly
in judicium, supplicium, captivitatem, - to trial, execution, imprisonment
agmen - army
qualia nomina nonnunquam omittuntur, - such nouns are sometimes omitted
nave - by ship
corr. codd. - corrected manuscripts
In utroq. l. pauci codd. - In both places few manuscripts
ubi animadv. artic. semel om. - where note the article omitted once
sive potius - or rather
in nonnullis codd. - in some manuscripts
ubi in aliis codd. - where in other manuscripts
quae alii ad alteram vim referunt. cf. Popp. adn. - which others refer to a different meaning. Compare Poppo's note.
quae vis nonnunq. praes. inest, ut - which meaning is sometimes present, as
ubi cf. Popp. adn. - where compare Poppo's note
Dan. - Daniel edition
Impersonaliter, - impersonally
sine - without
de flexione - concerning inflection
vid. Popp. Pr. - see Poppo's Prolegomena
et ibi suppl. - and supply there
ubi quum - where when
vulgo legeretur, adverbialiter positum voluerunt; cf. Popp. adn. - where it was commonly read, they wished it to be placed adverbially; compare Poppo's note
opt. codd. - best manuscripts
Deletum - deleted
interponitur vulgo - commonly inserted
de Brasida vulnerato - concerning the wounded Brasidas
in epigram. - in an epigram
Troiam - Troy
fugientem - fleeing
insolenter, cf. Popp. adn. - arrogantly, compare Poppo's note
magistratus - magistrate
cum genit. non per attractionem posito, - with genitive not put by attraction
genit. additum, - genitive added
cum genit. per attractionem posito, - with genitive put by attraction
Exempla - examples
cum accus. rei, - with accusative of thing
cum accus. hominis et participio aut addito aut subaudiendo, - with accusative of person and participle either expressed or understood
accus. hominis suppl. - accusative of person supplied
partic. suppl. - participle supplied
accedunt formulae - there are added the phrases
obiectum omissum et subaudiendum, - object omitted and to be supplied
particip. omisso obiecto, adiective positum, - participle with omitted object, used adjectivally
vulgo. - commonly.
ubi glossema videtur esse - where a gloss seems to be
al. leg. - others read
in bonis codd. - in good manuscripts
ubi tamen alii - where however others
iungunt. - join.
de copiis, maxime auxiliis, ducem sequentibus, - concerning forces, especially allies, following a leader
ubi, ut in posterioribus locis, quibus nihil additum, obiectum supplendum est. - where, as in later passages to which nothing is added, the object is to be supplied.
nunc - now
Neut. subst. abstr. - neuter abstract substantive
ante Theseum - before Theseus
Corcyrae - at Corcyra
gen. absol. - genitive absolute
ubi alii volunt esse fortitudinem; cf. Popp. adn. - where others wish it to mean courage; compare Poppo's note
Vat. om. - Vatican omits
cum artic - with article
Vat. Bas. - Vatican Basil edition
om. opt. codd. - best manuscripts omit
deest; Vat. etiam - is lacking; Vatican also
artic. omittunt plurimi codd. - most manuscripts omit the article
ubi pleriq codd. - where most manuscripts
om. Bas. - omit Basil edition
de artic. om. cf. Popp. adn. - concerning omission of the article compare Poppo's note
quod ante vocalem bis terve eliditur, - which before a vowel is elided twice or thrice
et in plerisque codd. - and in most manuscripts
ubi Vat. ducit ad - where Vatican connects with
in nonnullis codd. om. - in some manuscripts omitted
agendum - to be done
ubi comma vulgo ante - where commonly a comma before
ponitur, ut sit - is placed, so that it is
in paucis codd. - in few manuscripts
accedente particip. - with addition of participle
vi passiva, - with passive force
vel secundum alios - or according to others
collective in utroque loco. - collectively in both places.
Perdiccae et Brasidae - of Perdiccas and Brasidas
Laches et Nicostratus; Schol. Artst. Av. - Laches and Nicostratus; Scholiast on Aristophanes' Birds
nempe - doubtless
quod sensu caret. - because it lacks sense.
de Cleone et Brasida - concerning Cleon and Brasidas
Vat. et Vall. pro - Vatican and Vallicellian in place of
de ducibus - concerning the generals
ubi codd. - where manuscripts
Niciae litteras - letter of Nicias
libri pro - texts instead of
et plerumque addito verbo - and generally with addition of the verb
simi- - simi-
libusve, - or the like
ubi optimi - where the best manuscripts
ut vicissim - as in turn
sepulcra - tombs
corpora interfectorum - bodies of the slain
simil. Ib. - similarly there
interfectorum - of the slain
iidem art. om. - the same omit the article
ubi boni codd. - where good manuscripts
de duce, qui castra movet, - concerning a general who is moving camp
ante Wass. - before Wassius
secundum alios - according to others
ubi plerique codd. - where most manuscripts
ubi variis modis explicatur; cf. Popp. adn. - where it is explained in various ways; compare Poppo's note
ex Hom. II. - from Homer IIiad
de Camarina - concerning Camarina
Nicias ad prytanem - Nicias to the prytanis
deleta - having been deleted
nam scriptura nusquam certa est; Popp. proleg. - for the text is nowhere certain; Poppo's prolegomena
ubi in nonnullis codd. - where in some manuscripts
in aliis - in others
nonnulli codd. addunt - some manuscripts add
de oratoribus cum populo agentibus - concerning orators addressing the people
Vat. et alii codd. - Vatican and other manuscripts
tres codd. - three manuscripts
proprie de sexu vel aetate, - properly concerning sex or age
in Archedices elogio - in the epitaph of Archedice
de animo virili, - concerning manly spirit
pariter - equally
de armatis, - concerning armed men
sunt ii, qui vehuntur, - they are those who are conveyed
navem capere - to seize a ship
in allocutions, - in address
cum nomine appellativo, conditionem indicante, - with an appellative noun indicating status
eadem vis est in circumlocutione, - the same force is in the circumlocution
cum gentili - with an adjective of race
de singulis, - concerning individuals
de nonnullis, - concerning some
cum numeralibus, - with numerals
in magistratuum vel procuratorum numeris indicandis, - in indicating the number of magistrates or commissioners
hoc vulgo abest - this is commonly absent
de iis, quibus mandatum aliquod datur, - concerning those to whom some commission is given
in orationibus generatim pro - in speeches generally instead of
om. Ven. Vat. - omit Venice Vatican manuscript
opponitur ei, quod supra hominem est, - is opposed to that which is above man
ante Duk. - before Duker
proprie de genere humano, - properly concerning the human race
genit. post nomina partiendi, - genitive after nouns of sharing
opponitur aliis generibus, v. c. diis, - is opposed to other classes, for example gods
animalibus, - animals
agris, - fields
supellectili, - furniture
praedae, - booty
pecuniae, - money
in urbe vel regione - in a city or district
Aegitium - Aegitium
in castello - in the citadel
milites, ubi dux de suis loquitur, - soldiers, where a general speaks of his own men
cf. ubi de navibus agitur. - compare where ships are discussed.
in universo - in general
generatim - generally
cum artic. de homine prius memorato, - with the article concerning a person mentioned before
cum gentili, - with an adjective of race
ex super, cogit. - from what precedes, understand
e morbo - from illness
cum exercitu - with the army
de Deliis - concerning the Delians
non pauci codd. - not a few manuscripts
Atheniensium auxiliis enumeratis - the Athenian auxiliaries having been listed
de auro simulacri Minervae - concerning the gold of the statue of Minerva
seq. negatione, - following a negative
ubi, ut et in seq. pro - where, as also in the following instead of
e regione Thasi - opposite Thasos
e regione Boeotiae - opposite Boeotia
e Zacyntho - from Zacynthus
Chr. - Christ
opp. ipsius navali, - opposed to their own dockyard
de militibus in foris navium collocatis - concerning soldiers stationed on the decks of ships
valet; cf. Popp. adn. - means; compare Poppo's note
de urbe, opp. portui, - concerning the city, opposed to the harbor
ex Amphipoli Eionem - from Amphipolis to Eion
cum infinit. - with infinitive
quod exemplum, ob membrum - which example, on account of the clause
etiam ad alteram significationem, aut, si - can also be referred to the other meaning, or, if
scribitur, ad illam solam referendum est. - it is written, must be referred to that alone.
si haec verba huc pertinent; cf. Popp. adn. - if these words belong here; compare Poppo's note
de Aristogitone - concerning Aristogiton
vita - life
ubi dissentiunt interpretes; cf. Popp. adn. - where the commentators disagree; compare Poppo's note
deviris interemptis, - concerning the men who were killed
ab obsidione Potidaeae - from the siege of Potidaea
aut secundum alios - or according to others
singul. - singular
ubi optimi codd. - where the best manuscripts
de servis - concerning slaves
delendum videtur. - seems ought to be deleted.
ubi olim - where formerly
de Cleone - concerning Cleon
aut si - or if
subaud. ad secundam signif. referendum est. - supply to be referred to the second meaning.
e navibus - from the ships
ubi vulgo add. - where commonly added
dub. interpunct. cf. Popp. adn. - doubtful punctuation, compare Poppo's note
ubi est - where there is
promissum - promise
Bekk. coniecit - Bekker conjectured
ut in ceteris locis, legendum est. - as in the other passages, it must be read.
vulgo et in compluribus codd. - commonly and in several manuscripts
videtur esse, cf. Popp. adn. ad Schol. - seems to be, compare Poppo's note on the Scholiast
inprimis est isthmum aliaque - it is especially the isthmus and other
spatia angusta muris intercipere, seiungere, - to cut off and separate narrow passages with walls
activum pro - active for
ubi dubitatur utrum passivum sit an medium; cf. Popp. adn. - where it is doubtful whether it is passive or middle; compare Poppo's note
in utroq. loco nonnulli codd. - in both places some manuscripts
in orationibus - in speeches
vid. Med. - see the Medicean manuscript
interpretantur, quod a soluta oratione prorsus alienum est. - they explain, which is quite foreign to prose.
ubi fortasse est - where perhaps it means
satrapae - of the satrap
de Pharnabazo - concerning Pharnabazus
in epigramm. - in an epigram
item de - likewise concerning
de ordinibus aciei, - concerning the ranks of a battle line
de urbe Athenis, - concerning the city Athens
interpretantur; cf. Popp. adn. ad Schol. - they explain; compare Poppo's note on the Scholiast
semper cum partic. - always with a participle
Lacedaem. - Lacedaemonian
ad Thermopylas - at Thermopylae
de Thissapherne - concerning Tissaphernes
nisi ibi est - unless there it means
ubi ex Vat. access. - where it was added from the Vatican manuscript
ubi pro - where for
ubi in multis codd. - where in many manuscripts
ubi ex Vat. accessit. - where it was added from the Vatican
de exercitu - concerning the army
per appos. ad genit. loci, - by apposition with genitive of place
ex Athenis, ubi est is qui loquitur - from Athens, where the speaker is
ex Athenis - from Athens
non aliorum - not of others
cum genit. pers. - with genitive of person
de Atheniensibus Syracusas obsidentibus - concerning the Athenians besieging Syracuse
de Perdicca - concerning Perdiccas
quod vulgo abest - which is commonly absent
iaciendo - by hurling
adjectivi loco, - in place of an adjective
in aor. - in the aorist
fortasse de tago - perhaps concerning a cloak
ubi de artic. in multis codd. om. cf. Popp. adn. - where concerning the article in many manuscripts omitted compare Poppo's note
quinquies. - five times.
ubi nonnulli, invitis codd. omnibus, leg. - where some, against all the manuscripts, read
ubi artic. om. Ct. Vat. Mosq. - where the article is omitted by Cantabrigiensis Vatican Moscow manuscripts
ubi artic. om. Mosq. cf. Popp. adn. - where the article is omitted in Moscow manuscript compare Poppo's note
a nullo artic. abest - the article is absent in no manuscript
Transl, - Translate
ubi tamen alii post - where however others after
interpungunt, ut sit - punctuate, so that it is
transit. - transitive.
ubi tamen e superioribus - where however from what precedes
repeti potest. - it can be supplied.
et acc. - and accusative
seq. hominum nomine - following a word for person
ad aggrediendum vel propulsandum, - for attacking or repelling
seq. urbis vel rerum nomine - following a word for a city or thing
ad tutandum - for protecting
animantis aut urbis - of a living thing or city
cum dat. rei - with dative of thing
cum infin., qui semper aut praesentis est aut aoristi, praeter - with infinitive, which is always either present or aorist, except
et in bonis codd. - and in good manuscripts
ubi futur. - where future
non accedente altero subiecto, - without addition of another subject
cum inf. in personarum diversitate, - with infinitive when the persons are different
subauditur aliquando infin. - sometimes an infinitive is understood
ita saepe seq. enunc. relat., ubi indicat facultatem agendi pro arbitrio, - thus often following a relative clause, where it indicates ability to act at will
seq. infin. vel vulgari ratione posito, vel bis cogitando, - following the infinitive placed either in the usual construction or by thinking it twice
cum acc. subst. vel pronom. - with accusative of noun or pronoun
cum plural. neutro pronom. vel adiect. indicat opinionem hominum de rebus publicis, - with neuter plural pronoun or adjective it indicates public opinion about affairs of state
in perf. - in the perfect
de Atticae pagis ante Theseum - concerning the districts of Attica before Theseus
de Peloponnesiis - concerning the Peloponnesians
deerat - was lacking
Suid. s. v. - Suidas under the word
Quam vocem, ne pro gen. - Which word, lest for the genitive
acciperent, id fortasse obstitit, quod utroq. loco abest artic. Verum haec causa, ex - they take it, that perhaps prevented it, because the article is absent in both places. But this reason, from
satis idonea esse non videtur. - does not seem quite satisfactory.
de spatio, - concerning space
de altitudine, - concerning height
cui oppon. - which is opposed to
de ambitu, - concerning circuit
quod alii ad levitatem animi referunt. - which others refer to lightness of spirit.
ubi aliis est - where to others it is
de verbis, - concerning words
aliis est - to others it is
de Siciliae incolis - concerning the inhabitants of Sicily
lego - I read
sive mari oppon., sive est - whether opposed to sea, or whether it is
sive - or whether
hoc om. nonnulli codd. - this some manuscripts omit
in paucis et malis codd. - in few and poor manuscripts
cum attrib. adiect. vel simil. - with attributive adjective or the like
similiter Ibid. - similarly there
cum attrib. subst. - with attributive noun
speciatim de sociis, qui foedere iunguntur, - specifically concerning allies who are joined by treaty
vulgo male - wrongly in common texts
de rege, magistratu, vel simil. - concerning a king, magistrate, or the like
cum plural. neutr. - with neuter plural
in periphrasi, - in periphrasis
de partibus, - concerning parts
sine praep. - without a preposition
neutr. partic. pro subst. - neuter participle used substantively
de tyrannis - concerning tyrants
de numeris, - concerning numbers
sic omnes libri, non - thus in all books, not
de diebus festis, - concerning festivals
pro pass. earum locutionum, quae in act. ex - instead of the passive of those expressions which in the active consist of
et acc. nominis constant, - and accusative of a noun
speciatim de bello, - specifically concerning war
de foederibus, - concerning treaties
de concionibus, - concerning public assemblies
sing. - singular
de causa, - concerning the reason
de simultate, - concerning the quarrel
acc. - accusative
ubi rursus iidem - where again the same
alii aliter; cf. Popp. adn. - others differently; compare Poppo's note
interp. Cl. Ven. - interpreted by Codex Claro-Venetus
ubi recentioribus editoribus - where to more recent editors
suspectum est - it is suspect
Vat. rectius - Vatican more correctly
practer ea, quae supra memorata sunt - besides those things which were mentioned above
de rebus publicis, - concerning public affairs
legendum sit, dubitatur - whether it should be read is doubtful
foederis - of the treaty
in plur. - in the plural
Aug. Ven. Reg. - Codex Augustanus Venice Regius
ex urbe dedita - from the captured city
ubi in Vat. ordo invertitur - where in the Vatican manuscript the order is inverted
nisi est transitive, - unless it is transitive
de tributis sociorum - concerning the tribute of the allies
optimi codd. - the best manuscripts
cum infin. et acc. vel addito vel subaud. - with infinitive and accusative either expressed or understood
item subiecto omisso - likewise with the subject omitted
pariter sine subiecto - equally without the subject
item cum acc. et inf. - likewise with accusative and infinitive
ita ut aut gen. aut inf. subaudiatur, vel - so that either a genitive or infinitive is understood, or
alterius locum teneat aut tenere videatur, - holds the place of the other or seems to hold it
ex aliquo pacto vel proposito - from some compact or purpose
in numeris octonariis et nonariis, - in passages of eight and nine lines
It. Vat. Mosqu. - Codex Italus Vaticanus Mosquensis
de Antiphonte rhetore - concerning the orator Antiphon
pondus seu machinam - weight or engine
de captivis - concerning prisoners
de Ionibus - concerning the Ionians
tres quatuorve codd. - three or four manuscripts
tres mali - three poor ones
de navi, quae prior erat profecta - concerning the ship which had set out first
de Odrysarum regno - concerning the kingdom of the Odrysians
fama et auditione, - by report and hearsay
in urbem, portum - into the city, harbor
in societatem et foedus, - into alliance and treaty
vet - or
ubi tamen dub. signif. cf. Popp. adn. - where however the meaning is doubtful compare Poppo's note
cum partic. vel - with participle or
de scriptis - concerning writings
Port. - Codex Portensis
Aug. - Augustanus
cf. id. - compare the same
sine artic. cf. id. - without the article compare the same
similiter. Ib. - similarly. There
in locum, - to the place
ex Thracia - from Thrace
quod vulgo deerat - which was commonly lacking
e Trachinia in Euboeam - from Trachis to Euboea
Laur. - Laurentianus
de navi - concerning the ship
per Thessaliam - through Thessaly
scil. Brasidae proposita - understand the terms proposed by Brasidas
signif. dub. cf. Popp. adn. et Suppl. - meaning doubtful compare Poppo's note and supplement
ex Sphacteria - from Sphacteria
ubi vertunt - where they translate
Vat. iterum - Vatican again
Themistoclis - of Themistocles
Cl. - Claromontanus
et Suppl. - and supplement
ex Asia Byzantium - from Asia to Byzantium
ex Laconica Cythera - from Laconia to Cythera
ex Heraclea - from Heraclea
Geraniam - Geraneia
om. Cass. et Reg. - omit Cassianus and Regius
est acc. temporis, et - is accusative of time, and
intrans, accipiendum. - must be taken intransitively.
Ibid. olim legebatur, - there formerly was read
navem - ship
Ibid. vulgo iterum - there commonly again
naves - ships
hoc in praesenti - this in the present
Ibid. bis - in the same place twice
alii tamen subaud. - but others supply
de Themistocle ad regem Persarum profugo - concerning Themistocles having fled to the king of the Persians
si ibi - if there
unus cod. - one manuscript
data et accepta - having been given and received
de - concerning
duobus Rhiis - the two capes of Rhium
inf. - infinitive
ubi dativus, nisi cum - where the dative, unless with
iungitur, valet - it is joined, means
sine artic. pro - without the article instead of
ideoque modo - and so only
de Olpis oppido - concerning the town Olpae
deletum; cf. Popp. adn. - deleted; compare Poppo's note
de Acte peninsula - concerning the Acte peninsula
Cl. Ven. Reg. Marc. - Codex Claro-Venetus Regius Marci
passive est intelligendum, nisi locus corruptus est; cf. Popp. adn. - it must be understood passively, unless the passage is corrupt; compare Poppo's note
hoc deest in nonn. codd. - this is lacking in several manuscripts
signif. dub. - meaning doubtful
Vat. et Reg. - Vatican and Regius
in casu absoluto, - in the absolute case
ubi Scholiastae est pro - where in the Scholiast it means instead of
aliter - otherwise
vide supra. - see above.
de Naxo - concerning Naxos
omnino - altogether
Similiter, - Similarly
gen. dat. - for dative
dat. - dative
It. - Italus
iterum om. Reg. - again Regius omits
hoc om. Vat. Reg. - this Vatican and Regius omit
interpungitur - it is punctuated
Pal. Bekk. - Palatine Bekker
multi codd. om. - many manuscripts omit
male subscr. est - it is wrongly subscribed
Vat. male - Vatican wrongly
de duabus lineis, - concerning two lines
quarum capita anguli formam efficiunt, - whose ends form an angle
vid - see
de muris Athenarum - concerning the walls of Athens
ubi perfect. tolerari vix potest, nisi forte haec castella ad scriptoris aetatem permansisse putentur. - where the perfect can scarcely be tolerated, unless perhaps these forts are thought to have survived to the writer's time.
quo medio Graeci non utuntur - which middle the Greeks do not use
cum infin. non accedente altero subiecto, - with infinitive without addition of another subject
ubi artic. ante - where the article before
et commata delenda esse videntur - and the commas seem ought to be deleted
cum negatione, - with a negative
virgula minus apte ponitur, ut ad - the comma is placed less suitably, so as to refer to
referatur - it may be referred
de Pythia Corcyraeo - concerning the Corcyrean Pythias
cum regim. directo, vel enunciato vel subaud. - with direct government, either expressed clause or understood
cum relativ. - with relative
post verbum, quod pendet ab - after the verb, which depends on
positum, - having been placed
cf. Popp. adn. et Prol. p. - compare Poppo's note and Prolegomena page
in foedere Dor. - in the Doric treaty
rursus alii - again others
per parenth. interiectum, - by a parenthesis thrown in
de Pisistratidis - concerning the Pisistratids
Bekk. ubique aspero spiritu, cf. Popp. Prol. p. - Bekker everywhere with rough breathing, compare Poppo's Prolegomena page
seq. vulgo - following commonly
cum superlat. vis augendae gratia, - with the superlative for the sake of intensification
in Plataeensium oratione - in the speech of the Plataeans
pro quo nonnulli codd. - instead of which some manuscripts
ex interpr. - by conjecture
cum indignatione, - with indignation
de Arcadibus - concerning the Arcadians
ubi de singulis, ut aiunt, individuis agitur, - where individuals, so to speak, are discussed
ubi sing. oratorie pro plur. ponitur, quemadmodum - where the singular is used rhetorically for the plural, just as
de sociis Atheniensium et Syracusanorum - concerning the allies of the Athenians and Syracusans
vulgo contra libros - commonly against the manuscripts
supple - supply
ubi de singulis generibus agitur, - where individual classes are discussed
a pluribus singuli lapides afferebantur - by several individuals stones were brought
plures in utramque partem - several on either side
vel in plur, - or in the plural
vel in plur., - or in the plural
nisi forte - unless perhaps
legendum est; cf. Popp adn. - it should be read; compare Poppo's note
vel in sing., elliptice, - or in the singular, elliptically
alii suspicantur leg. esse - others suspect it should be read
Spartae et Athenis - at Sparta and Athens
de Nicia et Lamacho - concerning Nicias and Lamachus
nonnulli suspectum; cf. Popp. adn. - some suspect it; compare Poppo's note
in foedere Dorico, - in the Doric treaty
Vat. iterum et alii - Vatican again and others
rursus iidem - again the same
ab instituto sermone - away from the intended meaning
de Pelope - concerning Pelops
ubi plerique codd. habent - where most manuscripts have
vulgo et libri pleriq. - commonly and most books
vectigalia - revenues
de coloniis mittendis, - concerning founding colonies
qd si praeferas, subaud. - which if you prefer, understand
ut sit - so that it is
mari - by sea
de supellectile Egestanorum - concerning the furniture of the Egestaeans
Vat. Bekk. Goell. Did. - Vatican Bekker Goeller Dindorf edition
idem quod - the same as
similiter Ibid. bis. et - similarly in the same place twice. And
de Libya - concerning Libya
cum Vat. Bekk. Goell. legendum est, cf. Popp. adn. - with Vatican Bekker Goeller it must be read, compare Poppo's note
vulgo om. - commonly omitted
cum fut. infinit. - with future infinitive
item cum aliis temporibus; ita tamen ut potius - likewise with other tenses; but so that it rather
significet, - indicates
cum aor. seq. - with following aorist
cum aor sine - with aorist without
fluctuat scriptura inter hoc et - the text fluctuates between this and
cum praes. - with present
cum perf. - with perfect
cum relativo, ita ut infin. ex prioribus repetatur, - with relative, so that the infinitive is repeated from what precedes
cum simplici acc. - with simple accusative
item cum dat. - likewise with dative
quae verba desunt in plurimis codd. - which words are lacking in most manuscripts
depravati codd - corrupted manuscripts
a - from
ita distinguunt, ut - they punctuate it thus, that
sit - it is
duo tresve codd. - two or three manuscripts
de morte - concerning death
de terrore, - concerning terror
de aliis rebus, - concerning other matters
de Thasiis - concerning the Thasians
in quibus vulgo - in which commonly
genit. - genitive
quod ne graecum quidem est - which is not even Greek
de acie - concerning the battle line
Vat. et alii boni codd. - Vatican and other good manuscripts
de foedere - concerning the treaty
Valla - Valla
in populo - among the people
speciatim de praesidio oppidi, - specifically concerning the garrison of a town
in utroque loco, vulgo - in both places, commonly
nonnullis suspectum, cf. Popp. adn. - by some suspect, compare Poppo's note
om. nonnulli - some omit
de Pelasgico - concerning the Pelasgic wall
copias in expeditionem vel aciem, - forces on a campaign or lined up in battle
praesidium ex oppido, - a garrison from a town
de Epipolis - concerning Epipolae
de re nautica - concerning naval matters
perf. et plqperf. - perfect and pluperfect
e consilio - deliberately
cf. seq. - compare what follows
de fluminum ostiis - concerning the mouths of rivers
qd Poppo servavit; sed fut. v. - which Poppo preserved; but the future seems
hîc alienum esse videtur - to be out of place here
sc. aciem - supply army
de sententia - concerning opinion
cum genit. vel enunciato vel subaud. - with genitive or clause either expressed or understood
ludos - games
ubi Bekk. ex uno Vat. post - where Bekker from the single Vatican manuscript after
addit - adds
cf. Popp. - compare Poppo
adn. - note
auxilii causa - for help
sc. Athenienses vel Lacedaemonios - supply Athenians or Lacedaemonians
navium - of ships
alii ad lonicam imperfecti formam v. - others referring it to the Ionic imperfect say:
referentes, interpretantur: - referring, they explain:
vulgo et libri - commonly and books
iterum vulgo - again commonly
in Siciliam - to Sicily
in hoc et superioribus cur vulgatum - in this and previous passages why the common reading
servatum fuerit, cf. Popp. Prol. - was preserved, compare Poppo's Prolegomena
ubi vulgo additur - where commonly is added
qd. om. plurimi codd. - which very many manuscripts omit
iterum alii - again others
qd Schol. per - which the Scholiast by
in coloniam - to a colony
in bellum - to war
consiliis - for plans
c. acc. temporis, - with accusative of time
c. genit. - with genitive
vulgo et cum plurimis codd. Bekk. Goell. - commonly and with most manuscripts Bekker Goeller edition
aggerem - mound
onera - burdens
vulgo coniunctim - commonly together
aggressionis vel proditionis - of attack or treachery
speciatim de nocte, - specifically concerning night
de morbis, - concerning diseases
de Siciliae civitatibus - concerning the states of Sicily
de stato tempore, - concerning a fixed time
et pro - and instead of
de Antandro oppido - concerning the town Antandrus
vulgo praemittitur - commonly is prefixed
de quovis malo subito, - concerning any sudden misfortune
de impetu, - concerning an attack
Bekk. Goell. ex bonis codd. - Bekker Goeller from good manuscripts
de classi Lacedaemoniorum - concerning the Lacedaemonian fleet
vide - see
Athenienses Plataeensibus - the Athenians to the Plataeans
ubi passive dictum volunt, - where they wish it said passively
speciatim per litteras, - specifically by letter
quod infectum est - that which is unfulfilled
hoc om. plurimi codd. - this most manuscripts omit
derebus, - concerning matters
ad victum - for livelihood
Vat. addit - Vatican adds
item ad alia, - likewise for other things
poenam - punishment
hostem - enemy
Bekk. iterum - Bekker again
inceptum - undertaking
de Decelia - concerning Decelea
nonnulli - some
arma, - arms
de oraculo - concerning the oracle
de Acherusia palude - concerning the lake Acherusia
de civibus pro patria mortuis - concerning citizens having died for their country
speciatim - specifically
de piratica - concerning piracy
de palis in mari defixis - concerning stakes fixed in the sea
de Mylis - concerning Myli
cui praeferendum videtur - to which it seems should be preferred
nisi tamen - unless however
legendum sit, aut - it should be read, or
agrum et urbem, ut - land and city, so that
designet - it denotes
vulgo et in seqq. - commonly and in the following
res necessarias ad victum - things necessary for subsistence
res suas ex agris in urbem, - their property from the fields into the city
Scionem - Scione
de aqua, - concerning water
de freto Siculo - concerning the Sicilian strait
navibus - by ships
vulgo artic. om. - commonly the article is omitted
de Acte - concerning Acte
post priorem, - after the first
bis repetitum, - repeated twice
praecedenti - to the preceding
cum aliis comparat. - with other comparatives
Ibid, - in the same place
cum comparat. - with comparative
Bekk. Goell - Bekker Goeller edition
ad agendum - for acting
nisi pro - unless for
dictum malis, ut ad - you prefer said, so as to refer to
referatur, cf. Popp. adn. et ad - it may be referred, compare Poppo's notes on
sc. - supply
ubi artic. suspectus est, quippe quem in tali formula Thuc. addere non soleat, cf. Popp. adn. - where the article is suspect, since Thucydides is not accustomed to add it in such a formula, compare Poppo's note
de Scythis - concerning the Scythians
de Thracum imperio - concerning the rule of the Thracians
de hostium classe - concerning the enemy's fleet
Adverb - Adverbially
nisi - unless
intelligere mavis - you prefer to understand
de natatoribus - concerning swimmers
legitur. - it is read.
cum subst., ita ut verbi respondentis vim habeat - with substantive, so that it has the force of the corresponding verb
quae vid. sub his vocibus - which see under these words
item cum adiect. saepius extra artic. posito, - likewise with adjective often placed without the article
artic. om. multi et boni codd. - article omitted by many and good manuscripts
item de exercitus duce, - likewise concerning the general of an army
de propugnaculo - concerning a defense work
de insulis - concerning islands
de muro - concerning a wall
de Atho monte - concerning Mt. Athos
de Cynuria - concerning Cynuria
de loco - concerning a place
qd in libris deest - which in the texts is lacking
Intransitive, - Intransitively
cum adv. modi, - with adverb of manner
et gen. nominis, - and with genitive of a noun
cum comparat. adverbii - with comparative adverb
in - with respect to
cum superl. adv. - with superlative adverb
cum pronom. neutr. - with neuter pronoun
vett. edd. - old editions
ubi nonn. codd. - where several manuscripts
Part. praes. - present participle
qd om. Vat., uncis incluserunt Popp. Bekk. Goell. - which the Vatican omits, Poppo Bekker Goeller enclosed in brackets
ex Vat. insertum, vulgo deest; cf. Popp. adn. - inserted from the Vatican, commonly lacking; compare Poppo's note
cum temporis indicatione, - with indication of time
de eo quod usu venit, - concerning what happens
suspectum, cf. Popp. adn. - suspicious, compare Poppo's note
Imperf. pro Aor., i. q. - imperfect for aorist, that is
de regione coeli, - concerning the region of the sky
spatium diei, - period of the day
dies status, - appointed day
lux, dies opp. nocti, - light, day opposed to night
artic. om. nonnulli codd. - article omitted by some manuscripts
Neutr. pro subst. - neuter used substantively
Fem. sing. pro subst. - feminine singular used substantively
opp. mari, - opposed to sea
acie, - battle line
nonn. codd. - several manuscripts
iudicio, - trial
Oppon. bello, - opposed to war
de mensura nautica, - concerning nautical measurement
de mari speciali, - concerning a particular sea
locus dubius; cf. Popp. adn. - passage doubtful; compare Poppo's note
Lugd. - Codex Lugdunensis
c. gen. vituperationem aliquam continet, - with genitive it contains some reproach
Perf. refertur ad - perfect refers to
qd vid. - which see
Brasidae mortuo - Brasidas having died
cf. adn. - compare note
Ibid. similiter. - Likewise there.
Imperf. - Imperfect
vulgo ab- - commonly from
Plur. neutr. - neuter plural
Part. - participle
ex coniect - by conjecture
alii. et Vat. - others and Vatican
proprie, - properly
translate, - metaphorically
de vento constanti, - concerning a steady wind
de mense ineunte, - concerning the beginning of a month
cum adv. - with adverb
corporis, - of the body
loci, - of place
legem - law
in certamen, - to battle
murum, - wall
propr. - properly
transl. - metaphorically
cum inf., - with infinitive
ubi nonnulli ex coniect. - where some by conjecture
quod multo usitatius, cf. Popp. adn. - which is much more usual, compare Poppo's note
neutro sensu, - in a neuter sense
vel simpliciter - or simply
de concione, - concerning the assembly
nonnulli codd - some manuscripts
vulgo, Bekk. Goell. - commonly, Bekker Goeller edition
alii optativ. ex orationis obliquitate tuentur - others defend the optative from obliqueness of speech
om. optimi codd. - best manuscripts omit
subsequente inf. - with following infinitive
et post - and after
additur - is added
Hinc - hence
Duker invitis codd. - Duker against the manuscripts
de maris inundatione - concerning the sea's flooding
ubi nonnulli - where some
Vind. - Codex Vindobonensis
expeditionem, - campaign
de machina - concerning the engine
quod alii, cum locutione - which others, comparing the phrase
conferentes, - conferring
de Olyntho - concerning Olynthus
Similiter active, - Similarly actively
ante - before
de vento, - concerning the wind
de Gela oppido - concerning the town Gela
probab. - probably
de Pausania mortuo - concerning Pausanias dead
de sepultis, - concerning the buried
de cadaveribus, - concerning corpses
Transl. de praemiis, - Translate concerning rewards
de mercede, - concerning pay
de poenis, - concerning punishments
libri - books
loco, - in place of
usu solito, - as usual
loco suo, - in its proper place
Dor. pro - Dorian for
de Anactorio - concerning Anactorium
nuncium, consilium - news, plan
boni codd. Bekk. Goell. Arnold - good manuscripts Bekker Goeller Arnold edition
hoc vulgo abest; ex Vat. Bekk. et Goell. addiderunt - this commonly absent; Bekker and Goeller added from Vatican
quae supposita recentioribus editoribus esse videntur; cf. Popp. adn. - which seem to have been interpolated by later editors; compare Poppo's note
corrupta, fortasse - corrupt, perhaps
alii pro - others instead of
dictum volunt, cf. Popp. adn. - wish it said, compare Poppo's note
nisi subaud. - unless supply
qd. Bekk. ex Vat. add., ut ad Athenienses referatur; cf. Popp. adn. - which Bekker added from Vatican, so that it may refer to the Athenians; compare Poppo's note
de iudicibus, - concerning judges
interpos. - parenthetically
de populo sententiam ferente, - concerning the people voting
de oraculo, - concerning the oracle
de animi iudicio. - concerning judgement of mind.
perfect. - perfect
auctor de opere suo - author concerning his work
praetera vulgo - besides commonly
Bekk. Goell. cum bonis codd. - Bekker Goeller with good manuscripts
de itinere, - concerning a journey
de animo, - concerning spirit
de iis, quibus aliquid imponitur, - concerning those on whom something is imposed
de Pausania et Themistocle - concerning Pausanias and Themistocles
Adverb. - Adverbially
c. acc. et part. - with accusative and participle
de oratione habenda, - concerning a speech to be delivered
in lege - in the law
partic. impers. - impersonal participle
qd Poppo non improbat; alii, ut Arnoldus, passivo sensu accipiunt, ut ad Lacedaemonios referatur; cf. Popp. adn. - which Poppo does not disapprove; others, like Arnold, take in a passive sense, so that it refers to the Lacedaemonians; compare Poppo's note
adiect. - adjective
Popp. - Poppo
opp. - opposed
nonnulli omittunt, cf. Popp. adn. - some omit, compare Poppo's note
foedus, pacem - treaty, peace
de muris, - concerning walls
in Hom. H. Ap. - in the Homeric Hymn to Apollo
c. numeralibus ipsum numerum, sine ulla superlatione, vel ad minimum, significat. - with numerals it indicates the number itself, without any exaggeration, or at least
c. artic. - with the article
item per pleonasmum, - likewise by pleonasm
om. boni codd. - good manuscripts omit
vulgo pessime - commonly very badly
c. inf. fut. - with future infinitive
c. inf. praes. - with present infinitive
c. utroque, - with either
c. inf. aor. - with aorist infinitive
omisso inf. - with infinitive omitted
de locis editis, - concerning elevated places
de Cerdylio - concerning Cerdylium
de navibus quae procul a terra sunt, - concerning ships which are far from land
Adverbial. - Adverbially
idem - likewise
Ibib. - in the same place
Ibid. quater, - in the same place four times
de Clazomeniis - concerning the Clazomenians
qd vulgo abest - which commonly is absent
in epigr. - in an epigram
ubi nunc om. - where now omitted
c. aor. - with aorist
c. fut. - with future
post suppositionem, ubi ad rem ipsam redit oratio, - after a supposition, when the discourse returns to the matter itself
ex Vat. additum; vulgo abest - added from Vatican; commonly absent
de Rheginis - concerning the Rhegians
de Antiphonte - concerning Antiphon
Ib., - there
qd vid. s. - which see below
oppos. parti, - opposed to participle
coniiciunt - they conjecture
quae verba vulgo desunt - which words commonly are lacking
Goell. - Goeller
de Lacedaemone - concerning Lacedaemon
Amphipolin Hagnon - Hagnon to Amphipolis
coloniae - of the colony
Hagnonis - of Hagnon
de Minoe - concerning Minoa
de Epidamno - concerning Epidamnus
alii de aedificiis intelligunt. Cf. Popp. adn. - others understand it of buildings. Compare Poppo's note
quod alii - which others
glossema esse videtur - seems to be a gloss
praec. - preceding
vel simil. - or the like
de homin. - concerning men
alii legunt - others read
de Poloponnesiis - concerning the Peloponnesians
in oratione praeconis Boeoti - in the speech of the Boeotian herald
in libris deest - is lacking in the texts
Ibid. bis. Ib. - in the same place twice there
idem c. inf. - the same with infinitive
seq. superl. - following the superlative
ex Ham. H. Ap. - from the Homeric Hymn to Apollo
ut in caeteris locis - as in the other passages
iidem codd. - the same manuscripts
mulli codd. - many manuscripts
alii post - others after
interpungunt - they punctuate
Bekk. et Goell. ex Vat. - Bekker and Goeller from Vatican manuscript
caetera v. s. - for the rest see below
caetera vid. s. - for the rest see below
Cf. Popp. adn. - Compare Poppo's note
Perf. impers. - impersonal perfect
interpolatum esse videtur - seems to have been interpolated
cum partic. fut. - with future participle
Transitive, - transitively
b - by
oppon. singulis, - opposed to individuals
vel cum superl., - or with the superlative
praecedente artic. ponitur de summa alicuius rei aut de multitudine in unum collecta, - with preceding article is used of the sum of some matter or a multitude gathered into one
pars Atticae ab Oenoe ad Cropias, - part of Attica from Oenoe to Cropias
id. qd - the same as
absolute, de legatis mittendis, - absolutely, concerning sending ambassadors
de pompis, - concerning processions
quae delenda esse videntur, cf. Popp. adn. - which seem ought to be deleted, compare Poppo's note
bid. - twice there
unus codex - one manuscript
de Lacedaemoniorum perioecis, - concerning the Lacedaemonian perioeci
de Cytheris - concerning Cythera
quae om. nonnulli codd. - which some manuscripts omit
in foedere - in the treaty
Bekk. Goell. ex Val. - Bekker Goeller from Codex Valesianus
versibus - in verses
cum subst. periphrastice, - with substantive periphrastically
cum adiect., - with adjective
cum variis subst. efficit verbi periphrasin, ut: - with various substantives it forms a periphrasis of the verb, as:
apud Lacedaemonios, - at Lacedaemon
apud Mantineos, - at Mantinea
de Syracusis - concerning Syracuse
de Himera - concerning Himera
de Pericte - concerning Pericles
melius - better
de amplitudine, - concerning extent
cum art. - with the article
cum compar. - with comparative
cum superl. - with superlative
Bekk. Goell. om. - Bekker Goeller omit
periphrastice pro - periphrastically for
subst. abstract. - abstract substantive
qd et - which also
de Messeniis - concerning the Messenians
maxime - especially
agents de Pharn. - acting concerning Pharnabazus
cum. infin. - with infinitive
ut coniunctiones tempor. - as temporal conjunctions
cum ellipsi - with ellipsis
ind. - indicative
multi - many
de muro Plataeensium - concerning the wall of the Plataeans
Vat. alii - Vatican other manuscripts
v. s. - see below
ex Hom. H. Ap - from the Homeric Hymn to Apollo
de Strymone - concerning the Strymon
de signis militaribus, - concerning military standards
de insignibus navium, - concerning insignia of ships
Ibid. quarter, - in the same place four times
de induciis sacris, - concerning the sacred truce
quae vulgo desunt - which commonly are lacking
de pondere, - concerning weight
de mensura navium, - concerning measurement of ships
de imperatore - concerning a commander
accedit. - is added
item absolute, - likewise absolutely
Partic. adverbialiter, - participle used adverbially
vulgo artic. deest - commonly the article is lacking
in versibus - in verses
esse volunt - they wish it to be
vulgo abest - commonly is absent
artic. omittunt multi codd. - many manuscripts omit the article
in carmine, - in a poem
sequente pron. relat. - with following relative pronoun
praecedente artic. - with preceding article
Neutr. sing. - neuter singular
legendum est - it must be read
neutr. - neuter
Bekk. Goell. ex Vat. - Bekker Goeller from Vatican
deest in multis et bonis libris - is lacking in many and good manuscripts
de Brasidae clypeo - concerning the shield of Brasidas
in re militari, - in military matters
sine participio, - without a participle
cum acc., - with accusative
for- - per-
tasse - haps
vid. sub. - see under
de Thapso - concerning Thapsus
Partic. absol., - absolute participle
legibus et institutis, - by laws and institutions
de vooe et simil., - concerning the voice and the like
de animi affectibus, - concerning emotions of mind
de Naupacto - concerning Naupactus